What's new in .NET 11 – Preview 4 docs update (#53689)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/whats-new/dotnet-11/libraries.md

title: What's new in .NET libraries for .NET 11
description: Learn about the updates to the .NET libraries for .NET 11.
titleSuffix: ""
ms.date: 05/12/2026
ai-usage: ai-assisted
ms.update-cycle: 3650-days
---

# What's new in .NET libraries for .NET 11

This article describes new features in the .NET libraries for .NET 11. It was last updated for Preview 4.

## Process API expansion

> <xref:System.Diagnostics.Process> gains a substantial set of new APIs in Preview 4, covering common scenarios where you previously had to wire up `OutputDataReceived`/`ErrorDataReceived` events manually or use P/Invoke.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<xref:System.Diagnostics.Process> has a substantial set of new APIs that cover common scenarios where you previously had to wire up `OutputDataReceived`/`ErrorDataReceived` events manually or use P/Invoke.
```

BFloat16 (Brain Floating Point) is a 16-bit floating-point format that's commonly used in machine learning and scientific computing.

## Floating-point hex formatting and parsing

`double`, `float`, and `Half` can now be formatted and parsed in their hexadecimal IEEE-754 form. The hex form preserves every bit of the underlying value, making it the right choice for golden-file tests, cross-language interop with C/C++ `printf("%a", ...)`, and any scenario where round-tripping a `double` through decimal text is too lossy.

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/csharp/Libraries.cs" id="FloatingPointHex":::

## UTF validation and invalid-subsequence search

> Preview 4 adds two complementary features to <xref:System.Text.Unicode?displayProperty=fullName>. `Utf16.IsValid` answers whether a sequence is well-formed UTF-16 without scanning twice, and `Utf8.IndexOfInvalidSubsequence` / `Utf16.IndexOfInvalidSubsequence` return the position of the first ill-formed code-unit sequence (or `-1` for valid input). Together these let parsers, validators, and serializers report precise errors instead of generic encoding-error messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<xref:System.Text.Unicode?displayProperty=fullName> has two new complementary features. `Utf16.IsValid` answers whether a sequence is well-formed UTF-16 without scanning twice, and `Utf8.IndexOfInvalidSubsequence` / `Utf16.IndexOfInvalidSubsequence` return the position of the first ill-formed code-unit sequence (or `-1` for valid input). Together, these methods let parsers, validators, and serializers report precise errors instead of generic encoding-error messages.
```

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/csharp/Libraries.cs" id="JsonNamingIgnore":::

### F# discriminated union support

The serializer now understands F# discriminated unions out of the box. Apps that share types between F# producers and C# consumers no longer need a custom converter for the most common shapes:

```fsharp
type Shape =
    | Circle of radius: float
    | Square of side: float

let json = System.Text.Json.JsonSerializer.Serialize(Circle 1.5)
// {"$type":"Circle","radius":1.5}
```

### Utf8JsonWriter.Reset with options

> <xref:System.Text.Json.Utf8JsonWriter.Reset*> now accepts a <xref:System.Text.Json.JsonWriterOptions> parameter, so writer instances can be re-pooled with different options without allocating a new writer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<xref:System.Text.Json.Utf8JsonWriter.Reset*> now accepts a <xref:System.Text.Json.JsonWriterOptions> parameter, so writer instances can be repooled with different options without allocating a new writer:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/csharp/Libraries.cs" id="RegexAnyNewLine":::

### Regex engine and source generator fixes

> Preview 4 also includes several regex correctness and code-quality fixes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 11 includes several regex correctness and code-quality fixes:
```

- The non-backtracking engine no longer takes super-linear time on certain nested-loop patterns and produces correct results for cases that previously diverged.
- The regex compiler and source generator handle `resumeAt` correctly when a conditional appears inside a loop body.

> - The SYSLIB1045 code fixer no longer creates duplicate class names when applied across multiple partial declarations of the same class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [SYSLIB1045](../../../fundamentals/syslib-diagnostics/syslib1040-1049.md) code fixer no longer creates duplicate class names when applied across multiple partial declarations of the same class.
```

## Rate-limiting improvements

> A cluster of <xref:System.Threading.RateLimiting?displayProperty=fullName> fixes lands in Preview 4:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <xref:System.Threading.RateLimiting?displayProperty=fullName> class has a handful of fixes in .NET 11:
```

`PhysicalFilesWatcher` no longer throws when its root directory doesn't yet exist, and `InMemoryDirectoryInfo` resolves `..` and other relative segments consistently with the physical provider.

## MemoryCache OpenTelemetry metrics

<xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Caching.Memory.MemoryCache> now emits a built-in set of OpenTelemetry (OTel)-compatible metrics without an extra adapter package. To opt in, set `TrackStatistics = true`:

```csharp
var cache = new MemoryCache(new MemoryCacheOptions
{
    TrackStatistics = true
});
```

The new `Microsoft.Extensions.Caching.Memory.MemoryCache` meter publishes four observable instruments:

- `dotnet.cache.requests` (with a `dotnet.cache.request.type` tag that distinguishes `hit` from `miss`)
- `dotnet.cache.evictions`
- `dotnet.cache.entries`
- `dotnet.cache.estimated_size`

Pass an `IMeterFactory` to the new `MemoryCache(options, loggerFactory, meterFactory)` constructor overload for per-instance metrics. Without one, the instruments are aggregated process-wide on a shared meter.

## Discriminated-union scaffolding

> [!NOTE]
> This is a preview feature in .NET 11.

> Preview 4 introduces `UnionAttribute` and `IUnion` in `System.Runtime.CompilerServices`. These types are the runtime side of the C# discriminated-union design. They aren't directly user-facing yet—the C# compiler and source generators are the expected producers—but they ship in the framework so libraries can author against the surface now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 11 introduces `UnionAttribute` and `IUnion` in `System.Runtime.CompilerServices`. These types are the runtime side of the C# discriminated-union design. They aren't directly user-facing yet—the C# compiler and source generators are the expected producers—but they ship in the framework so libraries can author against the surface now.
```
